# Engineering process safety research instrument: Assessing students’ moral reasoning in process safety contexts
> Process safety decision making is a key component of undergraduate chemical engineering education. Despite this, there are no existing survey instruments designed to measure students’ moral reasoning in the context of process safety decision making. The Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument (EPSRI) was developed to address this deficit in process safety assessment. The EPSRI was modeled after existing moral reasoning in- struments including the DIT2, EERI, and ESIT. The process safety scenarios included were drawn from personal experience and reports from the Chemical Safety Board. Each scenario in the instrument was followed by a decision prompt and 12–15 considerations. The EPSRI went through content validation with chemical engi- neering industry practitioners and chemical engineering faculty members. Subsequently, three rounds of exploratory factor analysis were conducted to finalize the instrument design before a final confirmatory factor analysis was completed to ensure validity and reliability of the instrument. Completion of the exploratory factor analysis resulted in five dilemmas with 9–12 considerations each that loaded onto pre-conventional, conven- tional, and post-conventional reasoning constructs according to Kohlberg’s moral development theory. Confir- matory factor analysis reaffirmed the validity and reliability of the instrument and its ability to measure chemical engineering students’ moral reasoning within process safety contexts.
### J. Stransky, C. Bodnar, L. Bassett, M. Cooper, D. Anastasio, and D. Burkey, “Engineering process safety research instrument: Assessing students’ moral reasoning in process safety contexts,” Educ. Chem. Eng., vol. 42, no. November 2022, pp. 44–53, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ece.2022.11.004


# A retrospective analysis on the impacts of an immersive digital environment on chemical engineering students’ moral reasoning
> Process safety decision making in chemical engineering practice has a strong ethical and moral com- ponent. While effective process safety decision making can be taught, it is not solely a technical topic, and includes complex behavioral elements that classroom-based instruction finds difficult to capture. To capture the complexity of this decision making, we have developed a digital immersive environment, Contents Under Pressure (CUP), that includes both technical and behavioral elements. This immersion allows participants to explore realistic process safety decision points in a safe environment. To deter- mine the effect of CUP on moral reasoning, a retrospective study of two cohorts was conducted. The first cohort (n = 109) received traditional process safety instruction, and the second cohort (n = 181) had CUP included as part of their instruction. Pre- and post-assessment of participant process safety reasoning was achieved via the Engineering Process Safety Reasoning Instrument (EPSRI), also developed by the authors. Analysis of the data suggests that exposure to CUP has a distinct and statistically significant impact on process safety reasoning as compared to the comparison cohort.
### J. Stransky, L. Bassett, C. Bodnar, D. D. Anastasio, D. D. Burkey, and M. Cooper, “A retrospective analysis on the impacts of an immersive digital environment on chemical engineering students’ moral reasoning,” Educ. Chem. Eng., vol. 35, pp. 22–28, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ece.2020.12.003


# Exploring Student Decision Making Trends in Process Safety Dilemmas using the Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument
> There have been more than 150 reported process safety failures since the 2000s that resulted in not only employee injuries and deaths but also environmental impacts and financial detriment to the companies involved. For example, an isobutane fire erupted at Exxon Mobil’s Baton Rouge oil refinery due to workers disassembling a plug valve and gearbox outside of established protocol. Incidents driven by a series of poor decisions similar to this have highlighted how critical process safety decision making is to the chemical engineering industry. Leaders of the field have acknowledged the need for process safety education by incorporating it into occupational training. In addition to training, organizations such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the U.S. Chemical Safety Board (CSB), and Safety and Chemical Engineering Education (SAChE) have made strides to offer consulting services or develop curriculum tools to address these failures in process safety. Current research has shifted focus towards training engineering students to better prepare them to handle process safety dilemmas before they enter industry. Institutions offer courses and modules dedicated to process safety, but are these measures effective? For example, a student’s attitude towards process safety is typically unable to be properly assessed in an authentic situation until the students themselves enter industry. The Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument (EPSRI) was developed and validated as a means of measuring an individual's level of moral reasoning with respect to process safety dilemmas to address this gap in the field. The EPSRI is a paper-based questionnaire that presents five process safety dilemmas, three choices on how to respond (two options with one “can’t decide” choice), and eleven to fifteen ethical considerations per dilemma. The EPSRI has been implemented among fourth year chemical engineering students at eight ABET accredited institutions with a total sample size of 274. This paper will explore student decision trends based on the choices they made in response to the five process safety dilemmas in the EPSRI. The goal of this work is to understand why certain ethical dilemmas are especially difficult for students to evaluate. This paper will also investigate trends in students’ choices with respect to their school’s process safety curriculum. It was found that while taking the EPSRI students found it most difficult to select a choice where both options had similar immediate outcomes towards their company and coworkers. Research examining the effects of process safety curricula on student choices shows that certain assignments, such as in class discussions or assigned reading has no significant effect. Understanding these decision trends will lead to recommendations and revisions of current process safety curriculum, which could teach students more effectively and in turn decrease the number of industrial process safety failures in the future.
### Stransky, J., Bassett, L., Anastasio, D. D., Cooper, M., Burkey, D. D., & Bodnar, C. (2020). Exploring student decision making trends in process safety dilemmas using the engineering process safety research instrument. ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Conference Proceedings. https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2--34645


# Revealing the Decision-making Processes of Chemical Engineering Students in Process Safety Contexts
> Chemical engineering students need to be prepared to make process safety decisions in industry. Through analysis of the decision-making process of senior chemical engineering students, we found students would rather be “better safe than sorry” and did not often acknowledge complexities associated with their decisions.  Their decisions were mostly justified by rationalization.  This work reaffirms the need to contextualize process safety decision making as part of the design process to better prepare students for industry.
### Bodnar, C., Dringenberg, E., Butler, B., Burkey, D. D., Anastasio, D. D., & Cooper, M. (2020). Revealing the decision-making processes of chemical engineering students in process safety contexts. Chemical Engineering Education, 54(1), 22–30. https://journals.flvc.org/cee/article/view/107720


# Towards understanding the moral reasoning process of senior chemical engineering students in process safety contexts
> Despite process safety and ethical decision making being recognized priorities in many chemical compa- nies, process safety incidents continue to occur with unfortunate regularity. In order to understand why such incidents keep occurring, and to prevent future accidents from happening, it is important to study the decision-making habits of people employed at chemical companies, and to inform students of the difference between the influences of ethics and behavioral ethics in process safety decision making. This study seeks to determine how senior chemical engineering students approach reasoning through pro- cess safety scenarios through the use of a mixed methods study. This study found that four out of the five students who participated in the study demonstrated post-conventional reasoning, and the remaining student showed conventional reasoning based on the quantitative analysis of their responses. Students showed mostly post-conventional reasoning in their responses based on a qualitative analysis; however, through comparison of these results it was found that the moral schema students were classified as was not always truly representative of their moral reasoning.
### Butler, B., Bodnar, C., Cooper, M., Burkey, D. D., & Anastasio, D. D. (2019). Towards understanding the moral reasoning process of senior chemical engineering students in process safety contexts. Education for Chemical Engineers, 28, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ece.2019.03.004


# Work in Progress: Content Validation of an Engineering Process Safety Decision-making Instrument (EPSRI)
> Process safety is at the heart of operation of many chemical processing companies. However, the Chemical Safety Board (CSB) has still documented over 800 investigations of process safety failures since the year 2000. While not all of these incidents were severe, some did lead to employee injuries or death and environmental harm. As a result, chemical engineering companies are increasingly dedicated to process safety through training programs and detailed vigilance as part of their operations practice. AIChE and OSHA also offer courses in process safety to help support the industry. These efforts illustrate the paramount importance that chemical engineering graduates have an appreciation and understanding of process safety as they transition from their degree program into industrial positions.
> Previous studies have shown that despite difficulties due to course load constraints, process safety has been incorporated into chemical engineering curriculum through either the addition of new courses, incorporation of the content within existing classes, or a combination of the two methods. A review performed in Process Safety Progress suggested that a key step for departments moving forward is to perform an assessment of the process safety culture within their institution in order to determine how faculty and students view process safety. An issue with completing this task is the lack of assessment tools that can be used to determine how students are developing their understanding of process safety decision making. This observation led to the development of the Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument (EPSRI). This instrument is modeled after the Defining Issues Test version 2 (DIT2) and the Engineering Ethical Reasoning Instrument (EERI). Similar to these instruments, the EPSRI provides dilemmas, three decisions, and 12 additional considerations that individuals must rate based on their relative importance to their decision making process. The dilemmas developed in the EPSRI are based on case studies and investigations from process safety failures that have occurred in industry to provide a realistic context for the decision making decisions that engineers may be faced with upon employment. The considerations provided after the scenario are derived to reflect pre-conventional, conventional, and post-conventional decision making thinking as described by Kohlberg’s Moral Development Theory. Pre-conventional decision making thinking focuses particularly on what is right/wrong or good/bad from an individual level, whereas post-conventional thinking seeks to determine what is correct from moral and value perspectives at the society level.
> This WIP paper describes the content validity study conducted while developing the EPSRI. Dilemmas were examined by context experts including professionals in the process industry, chemical engineering departments, and learning sciences field. Content experts reviewed the dilemmas and determined whether they represented accurate examples of process safety decision making that individuals may face in real-world engineering settings. The experts also reviewed the 12 considerations for each dilemma for their accuracy in capturing pre-conventional, conventional and post-conventional thinking. This work represents the first step in the overall instrument validation that will take place over the next academic year.
### Butler, B., Anastasio, D. D., Burkey, D. D., Cooper, M., & Bodnar, C. (2018). Work in Progress: Content Validation of an Engineering Process Safety Decision- making Instrument (EPSRI). 2018 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition. https://peer.asee.org/31279

# Exploring Senior Chemical Engineering Students' Approach to Process Safety Decision Making
> Despite investments in chemical process safety education, evidence suggests that engineers’ decision making may contribute to process safety incidents. Currently, limited educational endeavors in process safety decision making exist, raising the need for a better understanding of how to prepare chemical engineering students for industry decisions. This dissertation fortifies current process safety education through three studies involving senior chemical engineering students. Study One developed the Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument (EPSRI) through exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. Educators may use the EPSRI to evaluate their students’ moral development. Study Two evaluated a digital process safety game, Contents Under Pressure, on students’ moral decision making. Study Two supports supplementing process safety curriculum with digital games because the game simulates process safety decisions in a plant environment, providing immersive first-hand experience without real- world risks. Study Two showed that students who played Contents Under Pressure made authentic decisions in the game, advancing their moral development. Study Three explored how students consider process safety criteria when making decisions, finding that safety takes precedence over other criteria, such as productivity, despite potential negative implications. Study Three supports educators contextualizing incident case studies with discussion on how process safety criteria compete.
### Stransky, J. (2023). Exploring Senior Chemical Engineering Students’ Approach to Process Safety Decision Making [Rowan University]. https://rdw.rowan.edu/etd/3122

# The Creation, Validation, and Implementation of the Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument
> The purpose of this study was to develop and validate an instrument that can measure how senior chemical engineering students make process safety decisions. The Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument (EPSRI) contains dilemmas that represent process safety scenarios, followed by three decision options, and 12-15 considerations that fall into pre-conventional, conventional, or post-conventional forms of reasoning. Three studies were completed as a part of this research. The content validation study ensured the dilemmas represented process safety scenarios, the considerations matched their perceived theoretical definitions, and that no content areas were omitted. This study resulted in validation of the content, following the elimination of one dilemma and eleven considerations. The large scale validation study determined the number of underlying latent variables present on the instrument including the correlation between considerations on a factor. The instrument was not able to be fully validated, but resulted in the elimination of one dilemma and six considerations with 22 considerations being revised for further study. The think aloud protocol with the EPSRI determined how students were classified based on their EPSRI scores, and their moral reasoning approaching these dilemmas. From this study, it was found that senior chemical engineering students mainly applied post-conventional reasoning, despite all the students not being classified as post-conventional based on their EPSRI responses.
### Butler, B. (2018). The Creation, Validation, and Implementation of the Engineering Process Safety Research Instrument [Rowan University]. rdw.rowan.edu/etd/2627
